 Lung carcinoma signaling pathways activated by smoking. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women worldwide, with over a million deaths annually. Tobacco smoke is the major etiologic risk factor for lung cancer in current or previous smokers and has been strongly related to certain types of lung cancer, such as small cell lung carcinoma and squamous cell lung carcinoma. In recent years, there has been an increased incidence of lung adenocarcinoma. This change is strongly associated with changes in smoking behavior and cigarette design. Carcinogens present in tobacco products and their intermediate metabolites can activate multiple signaling pathways that contribute to lung cancer Carcinogenesis. In this review, we summarize the smoking-activated signaling pathways involved in lung cancer. Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in men and women worldwide, with over a million deaths annually. Tobacco smoke is the predominant etiologic risk factor for lung cancer. Approximately 80% to 90% of lung cancer patients in the United States involve smoking. Histopathologically, lung cancer is classified as squamous cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or large cell carcinoma with other types accounting for a small percentage of cases. Small cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma are strongly related to cigarette smoking. Recent increases in the incidence of lung adenocarcinoma also appear to be associated with cigarette smoking and are probably due to changes in smoking behavior and lower tar content in cigarettes. Cigarette smoke contains over 60 chemicals that have been identified as carcinogens by the International Agency for Research in Cancer. The most potent carcinogens are polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzo [a]pyrene and the tobacco-specific nitrosamine known as nicotine-derived nitrosoaminoketone (NNK). Carcinogens present during smoking or produced in their intermediate metabolites can activate cell proliferation and survival signals, resulting in preneoplastic changes in bronchial epithelial cells and inducing lung cancer in laboratory animals. beta-Adrenergic Receptor-Mediated Signaling. beta-Adrenergic receptors beta-ARs) are members of the G-protein-coupled receptor family. The tobacco-specific nitrosamine, nicotine-derived NNK, is structurally similar to the classical beta-AR agonist and can bind beta-AR on pulmonary epithelial cells. This binding stimulates cell proliferation signaling pathways by triggering beta-AR activation, suggesting that beta-ARs play an important role in NNK-induced lung cancer (Figure 1). Once G-protein-coupled receptor family signaling is activated in NNK-treated lung adenocarcinoma cells, it can trigger the activation of adenylyl cyclase and cyclic AMP (cAMP) and the subsequent activation of protein kinase A (PKA). PKA further activates phospholipase-A2 and causes an NNK concentration-dependent release of arachidonic acid (AA) from cell-membrane phospholipids, increasing DNA synthesis and cell proliferation in adenocarcinoma. This signaling pathway can be completely blocked by beta-AR antagonists. In addition, both aspirin, a cyclooxygenase (COX) inhibitor, and ML-886, a lipoxygenase inhibitor, can partially inhibit DNA synthesis in cells after being exposed to NNK, suggesting that the AA-dependent mitogenic signaling transduction cascade' s role in Smoking-related lung Carcinogenesis involves both COX- and lipoxygenase-dependent messengers. High systemic levels of AA-metabolizing enzymes COX-2, AA metabolites prostaglandin E2 and leukotriene B4 have been identified in lung cancers in NNK-treated mice. Consistently, COX-2-positive tumors are more common in smokers (32%, 29 of 90) than in non-smokers (10%, 1 of 10, P = 0.15). In addition to AA metabolites, several transcription factors can be stimulated as downstream targets of beta-AR/PKA signaling, such as the PKA-dependent overexpression and phosphorylation of cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). Phosphorylation of CREB induced by NNK in human small airway epithelial cells and adenocarcinoma cells and overexpression of p-CREB in NNK-induced adenocarcinomas have been reported. CREB regulates the expression of certain genes, including Cyclins, Bcl-2 family members and Egr-1, whose aberrant expression promotes oncogenesis. An inhibitor of the CREB signaling pathway can block CREB activation in lung cancer cells by arresting the cell cycle at the G2/M phase and by inducing apoptosis through suppression of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL expression. However, CREB activation may not be specific in Smoking-related lung cancers. An immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue microarray containing adenocarcinoma, bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma specimens collected from 310 patients revealed a significant association between decreased survival and CREB or p-CREB overexpression in non-smokers but not in current or former smokers with lung cancer. beta-AR-mediated signaling pathways in lung cancers. Binding of nicotine-derived nitrosoaminoketone (NNK) to beta-adrenergic receptors (beta-AR) on pulmonary epithelial cells results in cAMP/PKA activation. Protein kinase A (PKA) causes arachidonic acid (AA) release by activating phospholipase-A2, leading to increased DNA synthesis. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and PI3K/Akt pathways may be activated as downstream of beta-AR to promote cell proliferation and inhibit cell apoptosis. beta-AR-initiated cAMP signaling may transactivate the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway, including overexpression of EGFR-specific phosphorylated tyrosine kinase, Raf-1, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and ERK1/2 phosphorylation (Figure 1). cAMP signaling and the EGFR/Raf-1/ERK1/2 pathway can synergistically regulate the growth and development of NNK-induced lung adenocarcinomas. NNK phosphorylates EGFR at tyrosine residues 991, 1068 and 1173 via beta-adrenergic stimulation. However, in one study, no mutations were detected in EGFR exons 18-21, which typically occur in non-smokers with lung adenocarcinomas. The phenomenon suggests that the EGFR pathway plays an important role in Carcinogenesis through distinct mechanisms in smoking- and non-smoking-related lung adenocarcinomas. Another signal transduction pathway, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, is reported to induce Bad phosphorylation downstream of beta-AR/PKA signaling (Figure 1). In human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells, nicotine induces ERK1/2, Akt, and PKA activation through an upstream beta-AR to trigger multi-site Bad phosphorylation. Bad phosphorylation blocks apoptosis and subsequently promotes cell survival. Subunit alpha7 of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (alpha7 nAChR)-mediated signaling pathways in small cell lung cancers. In fetal pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and small cell carcinoma cells, binding of NNK to alpha7 nAChR on the cell membrane results in Ca2+ influx and serotonin release, which activates protein kinase C (PKC) and the downstream Raf-1 mitogen-activated protein kinase/MAPK kinase cascade, leading to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation. Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-Mediated Signaling. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are ion channels located in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells. Initially identified at the neuromuscular junction, nAChRs are classified as neuronal or muscular. Neuronal nAChRs are composed of five identical alpha7, alpha8, or alpha9 subunits or a combination of alpha2-alpha6 or alpha10 subunits and beta2-beta4 subunits, whereas muscle nAChRs are composed of combinations of alpha1 subunits with beta1, gamma, delta, or epsilon subunits. Binding of agonist to nAChRs results in conformational changes to the receptors, with consequent ion influxes. These can result in the release of neurotransmitters or the stimulation of various intracellular signaling cascades. Nicotine can mimic the actions of acetylcholine as an agonist by binding to the a subunits of nAChRs. Up-regulated expression and activation of nAChRs has been reported in both lung cancer and normal bronchial epithelial cells by exposure to nicotine or NNK. Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. Recent studies have found that the proliferation of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and small cell carcinoma can be regulated by neuronal nAChR, which contains the alpha7 subunit. In small cell carcinoma cells, binding of nicotine or NNK to alpha7 nAChR on the cell membrane results in cation (primarily Ca2+) influx and activation of the mitogenic signal transduction pathway (Figure 2). Specifically, increased intracellular Ca2+ can trigger the release of serotonin, an autocrine growth factor. Serotonin activates protein kinase C (PKC) and the downstream kinase cascade that involves overexpression and activation of the serine-threonine protein kinase (Raf-1), and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), leading to DNA synthesis and cell proliferation in fetal pulmonary neuroendocrine cells and small cell carcinoma cells. The serotonin re-uptake inhibitor alpha-BTX (imipramine), the PKC inhibitor (sphingosine), and the MAPK kinase inhibitor (PD98059) block NNK-induced DNA synthesis and mitogenesis. Unlike small cell carcinoma, which primarily expresses alpha7 nAChR, squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and benign bronchial and small airway epithelial cells express multiple nAChR subtypes. These subtypes (alpha3beta2 and alpha4beta2), along with alpha7-containing nAChR, participate in smoking-induced squamous and adenocarcinoma cell proliferation and invasion (Figure 3). Unlike activation via Ca2+ influx stimulated PKC in small cell carcinoma, nAChR-mediated MAPK activation in squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma is mediated by the scaffcolding protein, beta-arrestin, which is independent of PKC. beta-arrestin binds and recruits Src to the receptors; activated Src further stimulates the Raf/MAPK pathway. nAChR-mediated signaling in lung squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas. nAChR-mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation in squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma is mediated by the scaffolding protein beta-arrestin, which binds to and recruits Src to the receptors and stimulates the Raf/MAPK pathway. MAPK activation functions with the PI3K/Akt and the EGFR/Raf/MAPK signaling pathways, both activated by Ca2+ influx through nAChRs, to induce phosphorylation and activation of transcription factors, further regulate downstream gene transcription and protein expression, provoke cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis, tumor invasion, and therapy resistance. MAPK activation can induce phosphorylation and activate transcription factors, such as c-Myc and activator protein-1, further regulate downstream gene transcription and protein expression, including bcl-2, cyclin D1, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, Interleukin (IL)-8, hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, fibronectin, and contactin-1. MAPK-associated extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2) can also activate bcl-2, p90RSK, m-calpains and micro-calpains, cyclin D/cdk4 and cyclin E/cdk2 cascades. Raf-1, which is activated by Srd, inactivates retinoblastoma (Rb) gene products and enhances Rb's dissociation with and E2F1's recruitment to proliferation promoters, such as cdc6 and cdc25A. Therefore, nicotine stimulation affects various components to provoke cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis, tumor invasion, and therapy resistance. Some MAPK downstream proteins have been found to be related to lung squamous cell cancer and adenocarcinoma in smokers. Cyclin D1 is expressed more often in lung carcinomas in smokers (77%) than in those from non-smokers (57%). In another study, cyclin D1 expression in lung squamous cell cancer and adenocarcinoma was associated with heavy smoking (>40 pack-years; P = 0.02) and a shorter overall survival duration (P = 0.01). nAChR-mediated, MAPK signaling-induced mitogenic effects varied by CO2 level in normal pulmonary neuroendocrine cells derived from fetal hamster lungs and cell lines derived from human neuroendocrine lung carcinoma. In vivo, exposure to NNK under hyperoxic conditions induced small cell carcinoma-like neuroendocrine lung tumors in hamsters, whereas under ambient air conditions, beta-AR-regulated lung adenocarcinoma developed. The finding of suboptimal O2 level and nAChR activation levels has important clinical implications. Because small cell carcinoma is more strongly associated with smoking than are other lung cancer types, smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease usually have high nAChR expression and are at high risk of developing small cell carcinoma. Researchers have also studied the roles of another two major mammalian MAPKs, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK, in nicotine-mediated Carcinogenesis. ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPK were all activated by nicotine in rat lungs, although in one report nicotine activated the ERK1/2 MAPK signaling pathway had no effect on JNK and p38 MAPK activity. A gene expression profile analysis of human bronchial epithelial cells revealed that ERK1/2 and JNK, but not p38 MAPK, are activated in response to nicotine. This variation in MAPK activation may be a result of different extracellular stimuli with distinct downstream targets and cellular responses. For instance, MAPK activation was reported to provoke smoking-induced apoptosis in rat lung tissues by up-regulating FasL, Bax, t-Bid, cytochrome C and Caspase 3, down-regulating bcl-2, and increasing Fas and p53 phosphorylation. However, JNK and p38 MAPK activation is more common in non-smokers than in smokers. The selective activation of p38 MAPK contributes to cell growth in adenocarcinoma cell lines from non-smokers. PI3K/Akt signaling. The PI3K/Akt pathway may be activated by nicotine or NNK binding to alpha7 nAChR or alpha3beta2/alpha4beta2 nAChRs (Figure 3). Akt activity maintenance is necessary for the survival of preneoplastic and transformed lung epithelial cells. The identified downstream proteins of this nicotine- or NNK-activated pathway include glycogen synthase kinase-3, ribosomal protein S6 kinase, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding protein 1, forkhead transcription factor, Bax, Bad, XIAP, survivin, hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, vascular endothelial growth factor and fibronectin, contributing to cell proliferation, anti-apoptosis, differentiation, cell migration, and tumor invasion. Activated Akt was detected in lung cancers from NNK-treated A/J mice and human lung cancer cells derived from smokers. However, one study revealed no association between phosphorylated Akt expression and adenocarcinoma in smokers or smoking status. In another report, higher phosphorylated Akt levels were observed in non-smokers with lung adenocarcinoma than in smokers. Further research is needed to clarify the role of Akt in Smoking-related lung cancers. Nuclear Factor-kB Signaling. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) is a ubiquitous nuclear transcription factor. The activation of NF-kappaB by smoke may be mediated by ERK1/2 signaling or through a pathway similarto that of tumor necrosis factor. NF-kappaB is in the inactive state in the cytoplasm as a heterotrimer consisting of p50, p65, and IkappaBalpha subunits. Upon activation, IkappaBalpha undergoes sequential phosphorylation by IkappaBalpha kinase and ubiquitination and degradation; the p50/p60 heterodimer is released and translocated to the nucleus, where it binds to specific sequences in the promoter regions of target genes. In squamous cell lung cancer and lung adenocarcinoma, smoke has been reported to induce NF-kappaB activation, which regulates the expression of downstream molecules such as COX-2, cyclin D1, matrix metalloproteinase-9, p21, C-IAP2, Bcl-2, and Bad, consequently promotes cancer cell proliferation and survival. Furthermore, NF-kappaB directly exerts carcinogenic effects to enhance cancer cell growth. Cigarette smoking induces the production of pro-inflammatory factors, such as COX-2, prostaglandin E2, IL-8, IL-6, and macrophage inflammatory protein 2, via NF-kappaB activation in normal human lung fibroblasts and alveolar macrophages, creating a pro-inflammatory environment. Long-term smoking induces chronic inflammatory lung diseases. Emerging evidence suggests that chronic inflammation plays a significant role in lung cancer pathogenesis by promoting tumor formation and NF-kappaB activation may be a link between chronic inflammation and lung cancer. EGFR Signaling. EGFR may be activated by its autocrine ligands, which are produced by oxygen radicals during cigarette smoking. In lung cancer cells, tobacco smoke-generated oxygen radicals stimulate the tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme, resulting in an increased shedding of EGFR pro-ligands, such as transforming growth factor-alpha, heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor, and amphiregulin. By binding to EGFR, these ligands activate EGFR phosphorylation and induce the expression of downstream targets such as IL-8 and mucin, resulting in lung cancer cell proliferation. Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid Signaling. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the most common inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. In a recent study, significant GABA underexpression was reported in NNK-induced hamster lung adenocarcinoma. An in vitro study using the immortalized human small airway epithelial cell line HPL1D and human lung adenocarcinoma cell line NCI-H322 revealed that signaling via the GABA receptor strongly inhibited base-level and isoproterenol-induced cAMP, p-CREB, element-luciferase and pERK1/2, effectively blocking DNA synthesis and cell migration. Therefore, GABA may have a tumor-suppressor function in small airway epithelial cells and lung adenocarcinomas. GABA down-regulation by NNK may contribute to cancer development in smokers. Conclusions. The number of smokers in the United States is decreasing. However, tobacco smoke is still the major etiologic risk factor for lung cancer, which is more common in previous smokers than in current smokers. A comprehensive understanding of the signals activated by Smoking-related carcinogens may help us develop targeted therapy for lung cancer patients with a history of smoking. References. Cancer statistics, 2007 [J]. Epidemiology of lung cancer: ACCP Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (2nd edition) [J]. The new World Health Organization classification of lung tumours [J]. Lung cancer [J]. Cigarette smoking and changes in the histopathology of lung cancer [J]. Lung cancer in never smokers:a different disease [J]. The tobacco-specific carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone is a beta-adrenergic agonist and stimulates DNA synthesis in lung adenocarcinoma via beta-adrenergic receptor-mediated release of arachidonic acid [J]. Beta-adrenergic receptors and their regulation [J]. Mechanisms of Smoking-related lung and pancreatic adenocarcinoma development [J]. Increased expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in rat lung tumors induced by the tobacco-specific nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-4-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone: the impact of a high-fat diet [J]. Inhibition of lung tumorigenesis by NSAIDS: a working hypothesis [J]. NNK activates ERK1/2 and CREB/ATF-1 via beta-1-AR and EGFR signaling in human lung adenocarcinoma and small airway epithelial cells [J]. NNK-induced hamster lung adenocarcinomas over-express beta2-adrenergic and EGFR signaling pathways [J]. Overexpressed Raf-1 and phosphorylated cyclic adenosine 3'-5'-monophosphatate response element-binding protein are early markers for lung adenocarcinoma [J]. CREB in the pathophysiology of cancer: implications for targeting transcription factors for cancer therapy [J]. Growth suppression of lung cancer cells by targeting cyclic Amp response element-binding protein [J]. Cyclic Amp response element-binding protein overexpression: a feature associated with negative prognosis in never smokers with non-small cell lung cancer [J]. Nicotine induces multi-site phosphorylation of Bad in association with suppression of apoptosis [J]. Genetic variability in nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and nicotine addiction: Converging evidence from human and animal research [J]. Is cancer triggered by altered signalling of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors? [J]. Human bronchial epithelial and endothelial cells express alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors [J]. Expression of the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in human lung cells [J]. Nicotine stimulates human lung cancer cell growth by inducing fibronectin expression [J]. Activated cholinergic signaling provides a target in squamous cell lung carcinoma [J]. Serotonin release and cell proliferation are under the control of alpha-bungarotoxin-sensitive nicotinic receptors in small-cell lung carcinoma cell lines [J]. Carbon dioxide potentiates the mitogenic effects of nicotine and its carcinogenic derivative, NNK, in normal and neoplastic neuroendocrine lung cells via stimulation of autocrine and protein kinase C-dependent mitogenic pathways [J]. Tobacco-specific carcinogenic nitrosamines. Ligands for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in human lung cancer cells [J]. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of muscle and neuronal (alpha7) types coexpressed in a small cell lung carcinoma [J]. Interaction of tobacco-specific toxicants with the neuronal alpha (7) nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and its associated mitogenic signal transduction pathway: potential role in lung Carcinogenesis and pediatric lung disorders [J]. Nicotinic receptor-mediated activation by the tobacco-specific nitrosamine NNK of a Raf-1/MAP kinase pathway, resulting in phosphorylation of c-myc in human small cell lung carcinoma cells and pulmonary neuroendocrine cells [J]. Tobacco-specific nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone promotes functional cooperation of Bcl2 and c-Myc through phosphorylation in regulating cell survival and proliferation [J]. Rapid akt activation by nicotine and a tobacco carcinogen modulates the phenotype of normal human airway epithelial cells [J]. Nicotine inhibits apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs by up-regulating XIAP and survivin [J]. Signaling pathways involved in nicotine regulation of apoptosis of human lung cancer cells [J]. Nicotine induces cell proliferation by beta-arrestin-mediated activation of Src and Rb-Raf-1 pathways [J]. MAPK/AP-1 signal pathway in tobacco smoke-induced cell proliferation and squamous metaplasia in the lungs of rats [J]. Nicotine induces resistance to chemotherapy by modulating mitochondrial signaling in lung cancer [J]. Long-term exposure to nicotine, via ras pathway, induces cyclin D1 to stimulate G, cell cycle transition [J]. Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway was significantly activated in human bronchial epithelial cells by nicotine [J]. Nicotine induces hypoxia-inducible factor-ialpha expression in human lung cancer cells via nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-mediated signaling pathways [J]. 4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) enhances invasiveness of lung cancer cells by up-regulating contactin-1 via the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor/ERK signaling pathway [J]. A functional role for nicotine in Bcl2 phosphorylation and suppression of apoptosis [J]. Role of alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in human non-small cell lung cancer proliferation [J]. Tobacco-specific nitrosamine 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone induces phosphorylation of mu- and m-calpain in association with increased secretion, cell migration, and invasion [J]. Protein kinase ciota promotes nicotine-induced migration and invasion of cancer cells via phosphorylation of micro- and m-calpains [J]. Association of cyclin D1 expression in lung cancer and the smoking habits of patients [J]. Cyclin D1 overexpression in bronchial epithelia of patients with lung cancer is associated with smoking and predicts survival [J]. Pathobiology of lung tumors induced in hamsters by 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone and the modulating effect of hyperoxia [J]. Simultaneous exposure to nicotine and hyperoxia causes tumors in hamsters [J]. The non-neuronal cholinergic system in the airways: an unappreciated regulatory role in pulmonary inflammation? [J]. Induction of apoptosis in the lung tissue from rats exposed to cigarette smoke involves p38/JNK MAPK pathway [J]. Mitogen-activated protein kinase activation in lung adenocarcinoma: a comparative study between ever smokers and never smokers [J]. Selective p38 activation in human non-small cell lung cancer [J]. Tobacco components stimulate akt-dependent proliferation and nfkappab-dependent survival in lung cancer cells [J]. Tobacco carcinogen-induced cellular transformation increases activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase/Akt pathway in vitro and in vivo [J]. Nicotine inactivation of the proapoptotic function of bax through phosphorylation [J]. Inhibition of non-neuronal alpha7-nicotinic receptor reduces tumorigenicity in A549 NSCLC xenografts [J]. PTEN and phosphorylated AKT expression and prognosis in early- and late-stage non-small cell lung cancer [J]. Differential expression of biomarkers in lung adenocarcinoma: A comparative study between smokers and never-smokers [J]. Tobacco-specific carcinogen 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) induces cell proliferation in normal human bronchial epithelial cells through NFkappaB activation and cyclin D1 up-regulation [J]. Identification of multiple MAPK-mediated transcription factors regulated by tobacco smoke in airway epithelial cells [J]. Cigarette smoke condensate activates nuclear transcription factor-kappaB through phosphorylation and degradation of IkappaB (alpha): correlation with induction of cyclooxygenase-2 [J]. Nuclear factor-kappaB: a pivotal transcription factor in chronic inflammatory diseases [J]. Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) down-regulates cigarette smoke-induced NF-kappaB activation through inhibition of IkappaBalpha kinase in human lung epithelial cells: correlation with suppression of COX-2, MMP-9 and cyclin D1 [J]. Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitor celecoxib abrogates activation of cigarette smoke-induced nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB by suppressing activation of ikappabalpha kinase in human non-small cell lung carcinoma: correlation with suppression of cyclin D1, COX-2, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 [J]. Haem oxygenase-1 plays a central role in NNK-mediated lung Carcinogenesis [J]. Cigarette smoke induces cyclooxygenase-2 and microsomal prostaglandin E2 synthase in human lung fibroblasts: Implications for lung inflammation and cancer [J]. Superoxide mediates cigarette smoke-induced infiltration of neutrophils into the airways through nuclear factor-kappaB activation and IL-8 mRNA expression in guinea pigs in vivo [J]. IKK alpha causes chromatin modification on pro-inflammatory genes by cigarette smoke in mouse lung [J]. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with lung cancer and/or cardiovascular disease [J]. Autocrine ligands for the epidermal growth factor receptor mediate interleukin-8 release from bronchial epithelial cells in response to cigarette smoke [J]. Tobacco smoke-induced lung cell proliferation mediated by tumor necrosis factor alpha-converting enzyme and amphiregulin [J]. Cigarette smoke induces MUC5AC mucin overproduction via tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme in human airway epithelial (NCI-H292) cells [J]. Gamma-aminobutyric acid, a potential tumor suppressor for small airway-derived lung adenocarcinoma [J].